VAC-RAW/Consensus-hashgraphlike RFC (#142)
vacp2p/rfc-index: vac/raw/consensus-hashgraphlike.md

---
title: consensus-hashgraphlike
name: Hashgraphlike Consensus Protocol
status: raw
category: Standards Track
tags: 
editor: Ugur Sen <ugur@status.im> 
contributors: Seemenkina <ekaterina@status.im>
---
## Abstract

This document specifies a scalable, decentralized, and Byzantine Fault Tolerant (BFT)
consensus mechanism inspired by Hashgraph, designed for binary decision-making in P2P networks.

## Motivation

Consensus is one of the essential components of decentralization.
In particular, the decentralized group messaging application is used for
binary decision-making to govern the group.
Therefore, each user contributes to the decision-making process.
Besides achieving decentralization, the consensus mechanism MUST be strong:

> under the assumption of at least 2/3 honest users in the network,
> each user MUST conclude the same decision and scalability:
> the rounds MUST be growth logarithmic so as not to lose the scalability of the messaging applications.

Author: Yes, looks like we need. It is for message propagation and thus consensus. The "log term" comes from here: In pure p2p networks, each round the proposal propagation is doubled. Consider the first round, only 1 person knows, then by sending it, it will be 2. These two peers send two different people (ideally).  After the second round, 4 peers can receive it so on. So I would suggest this. 

```suggestion
under the assumption of at least 2/3 honest users in the network,
each user MUST conclude the same decision and scalability:
message propagation in the network MUST occur within O(log n) rounds, where n is the total number of peers, in order to preserve the scalability of the messaging application.
```

> the rounds MUST be growth logarithmic so as not to lose the scalability of the messaging applications.

Reviewer: Yeah, this sounds better

## Format Specification

The key words “MUST”, “MUST NOT”, “REQUIRED”, “SHALL”, “SHALL NOT”,
“SHOULD”, “SHOULD NOT”, “RECOMMENDED”, “MAY”, and “OPTIONAL” in this document
are to be interpreted as described in [2119](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2119.txt).

## Flow

Any user in the group initializes the consensus by creating a template that
consists of the proposal without any registration phase.
Next, the user broadcasts the template to the whole network.
Upon each user receives the template, validates the proposal,
adds its vote as yes or no and with its signature and timestamp.

> Then this user sends the vote to the random node in the network or subscribing channel.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's pretty much what I mean. I think it should be stated that we expect voting to be strictly either group or 1-1.

> Then this user sends the vote to the random node in the network or subscribing channel.

Author: You mean de-MLS group? I tried to separate the consensus and de-MLS RFC, so I cna skip mentioning about group chat here then I can clarify this in de-MLS RFC. For now, I suggest that we keep this like this only specifying the architecture pure P2P or gossipsub like [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/03ae85512a32abe08a488cf82306096e7b2d8560)

> Then this user sends the vote to the random node in the network or subscribing channel.

Reviewer: sorry, I mean gossipsub. Yeah, I agree that we should separate as much as possible. I just think it's important to sub in rfc that voting should strictly be segregated - either p2p or in gossipsub

In general, the voting-based consensus consists of the following phases:

1. Initialization of voting
2. Exchanging votes across the rounds
3. Counting the votes

### Assumptions

- The users in the P2P network can discover the nodes or they are subscribing same channel in a gossipsub.
- We MAY have non-reliable (silent) nodes.
- Proposal owners MUST know the number of voters.

## 1. Initialization of voting

A user initializes the voting with the proposal payload which is
implemented using [protocol buffers v3](https://protobuf.dev/) as follows:

```bash
syntax = "proto3";

package vac.voting;

message Proposal {
  string name = 10;                 // Proposal name
  int32 proposal_id = 11;           // Unique identifier of the proposal
  bytes proposal_owner = 12;        // Public key of the creator 
  repeated Votes = 13;              // Vote list in the proposal
  int32 expected_voters_count = 14; // Maximum number of distinct voters
  int32 round = 15;                 // Number of Votes 
  int64 timestamp = 16;             // Creation time of proposal
  int64 expiration_time = 17;       // The time interval that the proposal is active.  

>   bool liveness_criteria_yes = 18;  // Shows how managing the silent peers vote

Reviewer: this one better

- Check the hash checks in particular:
  - Parenthash check prevents double voting
  - Receivedhash check provides tampering attacks

In particular, proposal message P_1 where its vote V_1 = P_1.votes[0] and performs as follows:

- Verifiy the vote V_1.signature with with the V_1.vote_owner in the proposal.
- If the peer verifies the signature,
it continues to create P_2 with the new vote V_2 that consists of as following:
  - adding its public key
  - timestamp
  - boolean vote
  - V_2.parent_hash = 0 if there is no previous peer's vote, otherwise Hash of previous owner's vote
  - V_2.received_hash = P_1.votes[0]
  - Calculate vote_hash by  hash of Vote hash(vote_id, owner, timestamp, vote, parent_hash, received_hash)
    then adds the V_2.vote_hash
  - Sign vote_hash with its private key then adds V_2.vote_hash.
- Create P_2 with by adding V_2 as follows:
  - P_2.name, P_2.proposal_id and P_2.proposal_owner are the same with P_1.
  - Add the V_2 to the P_2.Votes list.
  - Increase the round by one, namely P_2.round = P_1.round + 1.
  - Verify the time proposal timestamp is valid for expiration time, namely P_2.timestamp - current < P_1.expiration_time.

>   If this does not hold, other peers ignore the message.

Reviewer: Yes, we need to think how best, because I think this parameter is important because it determines how long it will take to vote and if for example it will change, it will disrupt the algorithm

After the peer creates the proposal P_2 with its vote V_2,
sends it to the random peer from the network or
sends it to the proposal to the specific channel.

## 3. Determining the Result

Since a peer cannot know if the votes are enough for the consensus without counting,

> it requires checking each time by the peers.

Reviewer: sounds like: we can't understand without counting, so we count it 

is it right understanding?

The voting result is set YES if the majority of the 2n/3 from the distinct peers vote YES.

> To check the findDistintVoter method takes the proposal and extracts the number of distinct voters by
> traversing the Votes list in the proposal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify, the findDistinctVoter method processes the proposal by traversing its Votes list to determine the number of unique voters.

```

> If this method returns true, then we check the strong validation of the vote as follows:

Reviewer: what does `strong validation` mean?

- Check each signature in the vote

>   - as shown in the section Exchanging votes across the peers.

Reviewer: if we have the numeration above in the section Exchanging votes across the peers, we can refer to it here

Author: yes, did [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/32c8a45541204d4a99c38652df7646494f0c5191)

Reviewer: I mean numerate all checks inside section. Now we have unnumbered list and when you refer to this section sounds like we have to repeat all of them, but we only refer to part with signature

- Check the parent hash chain
  - if there are multiple votes from the same owner namely vote_i and vote_i+1 respectively,
    the parent hash of vote_i+1 should be the hash of vote_i
- Check the previous hash chain
  - each received hash of vote_i+1 should be equal to the hash of vote_i.
- Check the timestamp against the replay attack:
  - timestamps check the freshness of the message against the replay.

>     In particular, the timestamp cannot be the old in the determined threshold.

Reviewer: again, who will determine threshold?

If a proposal is verified by all the checks,

> the countVote method counts each YES vote from the list of Votes.

Reviewer: looks like we can make a list with API, you already mentioned some of them, what do you think?

## Properties

The consensus mechanism satisfies liveness and security properties as follows:

### Liveness

> Regarding the liveness property, if the YES votes are greater than n/2 among

Reviewer: We need to add refer to liveness property definition

Reviewer: if next part of sentence IS a definition, so it's better to rephrase it

Author: Make sense, [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/d8850a807cdf5d76a3484f47fd53a3f870f28864)

Author: make sense, added the definition [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/d8850a807cdf5d76a3484f47fd53a3f870f28864)

 the 2n/3 of the distinct peers that vote, we define the consensus result as YES.

>  The peer calculates the result locally. From the hashgraph property,

Reviewer: `The peer calculates the result locally` - here add reference to calculation section

Reviewer: And link to the hashgraph property in their rfc

Author: yes, here is the [commit](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/4faa9a83d6dceb6f181714bfa79656fab9426133)

 if a node could calculate the result of a proposal,
 it implies that no peer can calculate the opposite of the result.
 Still, reliability issues can cause some situations where peers cannot receive enough messages,
 so they cannot calculate the consensus result.

Rounds are incremented when a peer adds and sends the new proposal.
Calculating the required number of rounds, 2n/3 from the distinct peers' votes is achieved in two ways:

1. 2n/3 rounds in pure P2P networks
2. 2 rounds in gossipsub

Since the message complexity is O(1) in the gossipsub channel,
in case the network has reliability issues,
the second round is used for the peers cannot receive all the messages from the first round.

If there is an online peer who has at least one vote but not enough for the consensus,
the peer can continue to send the message for those not received enough messages
too in the expiration time written in the proposal.

> Also, the expiration time is used to finalize the consensus in a specific time interval.

Reviewer: can't follow 

first, does this statement  belong to gossipsub or/and pure P2P? Maybe we need to create subsection to describe difference of this ways, for pure p2p just refer to hashgraph rfc and for gossipsub add more details

And regarding `expiration time`, it was time when proposal is valid, but here we add one more function to this time. Maybe we need to choose another name?

Author: I think this situation can be occured in both p2p and gossipsub. So, at the first look cannot see the strong reason to split RFC. Let me clarify it and discuss on again if still there is a unclear point. [here ](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/eab21fd67a7e67077c1c00d37e1e54b8d24a25f5)is the clarification.

Reviewer: now, make sense, thank you

> Lastly, silent node management: Silent nodes are the nodes that not participate the voting as YES or NO.

Reviewer: let's make subsection for Silent mode

Author: addressed [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/6b6ac2e53a06c3ab53f159680925cf732582077f)

There are two possible counting votes for the silent peers.

1. Silent peers means YES:
Silent peers counted as YES vote, if the application prefer the strong rejection for NO votes.
2. Silent peers means NO:
Silent peers counted as NO vote, if the application prefer the strong acception for NO votes.

The proposal is set to default true, which means silent peers' votes are counted as YES.

### Security

This RFC uses cryptographic primitives to prevent the
malicious behaviours as follows:

- Vote forgery attempt: creating unsigned invalid votes

> - Inconsistent voting: both yes and no voting in different stages.

Reviewer: that does different stages mean?

Author: Means, if there a malicious peer, he can send conflicted votes by changing their vote in different rounds. The stage is general part of a protocol. clarified [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/79250906ef0bf6a30120cea71313dfe8ad7a86de)

In general, the voting-based consensus consists of the following phases:

1. Initialization of voting
2. Exchanging votes across the rounds
3. Counting the votes

### Assumptions

- The users in the P2P network can discover the nodes or they are subscribing same channel in a gossipsub.
- We MAY have non-reliable (silent) nodes.
- Proposal owners MUST know the number of voters.

## 1. Initialization of voting

A user initializes the voting with the proposal payload which is
implemented using [protocol buffers v3](https://protobuf.dev/) as follows:

```bash
syntax = "proto3";

package vac.voting;

message Proposal {
  string name = 10;                 // Proposal name
  int32 proposal_id = 11;           // Unique identifier of the proposal
  bytes proposal_owner = 12;        // Public key of the creator 
  repeated Votes = 13;              // Vote list in the proposal
  int32 expected_voters_count = 14; // Maximum number of distinct voters
  int32 round = 15;                 // Number of Votes 
  int64 timestamp = 16;             // Creation time of proposal
  int64 expiration_time = 17;       // The time interval that the proposal is active.  

>   bool silent_node_yes = 18;       // Shows how managing the silent peers vote

Reviewer: You refer to `liveness_criteria_yes`in silent node section, but here it's still `silent_node_yes`

to the random peer from the network or sends it to the proposal to the specific channel.

## 2. Exchanging votes across the peers

Once the peer receives the proposal message `P_1` from a 1-1 or a gossipsub channel does the following checks:

1. Check the signatures of the each votes in proposal, in particular for proposal `P_1`,
verify the signature of `V_1` where `V_1 = P_1.votes[0]` with `V_1.signature` and `V_1.vote_owner`
2. Do `parent_hash` check: If there are repeated votes from the same sender,
check that the hash of the former vote is equal to the `parent_hash` of the later vote.
3. Do `received_hash` check: If there are multiple votes in a proposal, check that the hash of a vote is equal to the `received_hash` of the next one.
4. After successful verification of the signature and hashes, the receiving peer proceeds to generate `P_2` containing a new vote `V_2` as following:

   4.1. Add its public key as `P_2.vote_owner`.

   4.2. Set `timestamp`.

   4.3. Set boolean `vote`.

   4.4. Define `V_2.parent_hash = 0` if there is no previous peer's vote, otherwise hash of previous owner's vote.

   4.5. Set `V_2.received_hash = hash(P_1.votes[0])`.
  

>    4.6. Calculate `vote_hash` by hash of all previously defined fields in Vote:
>   `V_2.vote_hash = hash(vote_id, owner, timestamp, vote, parent_hash, received_hash)`
>   
>    4.7. Set `proposal_id` for the `vote`.

Reviewer: I think we have to include proposal_id into hash too 

```suggestion
   4.6. Set `proposal_id` for the `vote`.
   
   4.7. Calculate `vote_hash` by hash of all previously defined fields in Vote:
  `V_2.vote_hash = hash(vote_id, owner, proposal_id, timestamp, vote, parent_hash, received_hash)`
```

>    4.8. Set `proposal_id` for the `vote`.

Author: nice catch thank you, addressed [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/99c92d5e2e9b7d41ac792e8463c62950af237505)

  string payload = 11;               // Proposal description
  uint32 proposal_id = 12;           // Unique identifier of the proposal
  bytes proposal_owner = 13;         // Public key of the creator 
  repeated Votes = 14;               // Vote list in the proposal
  uint32 expected_voters_count = 15; // Maximum number of distinct voters
  uint32 round = 16;                 // Number of Votes 
  uint64 timestamp = 17;             // Creation time of proposal
  uint64 expiration_time = 18;       // The time interval that the proposal is active.  
  bool liveness_criteria_yes = 19;   // Shows how managing the silent peers vote
}

message Vote {
  uint32 vote_id = 20;            // Unique identifier of the vote
  bytes vote_owner = 21;          // Voter's public key
  int64 timestamp = 22;           // Time when the vote was cast
  bool vote = 23;                 // Vote bool value (true/false)
  bytes parent_hash = 24;         // Hash of previous owner's Vote
  bytes received_hash = 25;       // Hash of previous received Vote
  bytes vote_hash = 26;           // Hash of all previously defined fields in Vote
  bytes signature = 27;           // Signature of vote_hash

>   uint32 proposal_id = 28;        // Linking votes and proposals

Author: yes make sense, moved it [here](https://github.com/vacp2p/rfc-index/pull/142/commits/c34362980fc04b64d822060e930103f16f057758)

4. Check the `timestamp` against the replay attack.
In particular, the `timestamp` cannot be the old in the determined threshold.

> 5. Check that the number of YES votes strictly exceeds the number of NO votes.

Author: It seems you prefer the more flexible spec because existing once just rejects the equality.
